Revamp bulk RNA-seq module with mapping validation (#96)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: RNA-seq/01-qc_trim_quant.md

These samples come from a project ([`PRJNA178120`](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/PRJNA178120)) that includes 8 samples from normal gastric tissue, gastric cancer cell lines and primary gastric tumor cell cultures.

Here we will perform quality control checks, trimming, and estimate the transcript abundances for a single sample, SRR585570.

**Our objectives:**

* Get comfortable with the command line
* Learn about project organization
* Become familiar with [FastQC](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/), preprocessing with [fastp](https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp) and quantification with [Salmon](https://combine-lab.github.io/salmon/)

Later, we will use the full dataset (n = 8) to explore how to summarize estimates to the gene level and do some exploratory data analyses with data the course directors have processed ahead of time.

---

For these exercises, we'll want to set our **LOCAL FOLDER** in Kitematic to the `RNA-seq` folder.

Copy and paste the text in the code blocks below into your `Terminal` window in RStudio.
It should be in the lower left hand corner as a tab next to `Console`.

> We'll first want to set our working directory to the top-level of the RNA-seq folder like so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll first want to set our working directory to the top-level of the RNA-seq folder like so:
```

```bash
cd kitematic
```

**Because these steps are computationally time intensive, we've prepared a script to start running things.**
Once we start running the script, we will give a short lecture to introduce this module and then walk through and explain each of the individual steps that the script is executing.

**Enter the following in the Terminal to start running the script:**

```bash
./script/run_SRR585570.sh
```

_Note: Don't worry if the Salmon step does not complete by the time we move on to the next notebook.
This is a time and resource intensive step, so we have prepared the required output in case we need it._

### Input files

The raw data FASTQ files (`fastq.gz`) for this sample, SRR585570, are in `data/fastq/gastric_cancer/SRR585570`.

> The first two directories, `data/fastq`, tell us that these files are data and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first two directories, `data/fastq`, tell us that these files are `data` and what type of data (fastq) these data are. 
```
Is this what you mean?

Author: The ticks around data are omitted on purpose, but I forgot to finish the sentence yea.

> The third directory `gastric_cancer` tells us which experiment or dataset these data are from. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the third directory `gastric_cancer` tells us which experiment or dataset these data are from. 
```

Reviewer: I think these sentences might have gotten lost/jumbled in your edits. Can you re-work them or you could also probably remove some of this entirely. Another thought is thatt this may be stuff you explain in person, but it feels a little obvious that the `data` folder would be for data. So I'm not sure if your original intention for this got lost or what this is intending to teach me here.

Author: I'm reworking them. Note one of the stated objectives is to learn about project organization and that's not really covered in the introduction to R that comes before this. It is purposely obvious here (I will probably say as much in person) and then how we talk about it becomes less obvious throughout this document. 

I'll also note that having all files in the same directory is something I've commonly seen folks with less experience do.

* [Bad Illumina data example report](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/bad_sequence_fastqc.html) from FastQC

FastQC runs a series of quality checks on sequencing data and provides an HTML report. As the authors point out in the [docs](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/Help/2%20Basic%20Operations/2.2%20Evaluating%20Results.html):

> It is important to stress that although the analysis results appear to give a pass/fail result, these evaluations must be taken in the context of what you expect from your library.

The [documentation for individual modules/analyses](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/Help/3%20Analysis%20Modules/) in FastQC is a great resource!

To save time, our script only runs one FASTQ file for SRR585570 with the following command:

```bash
# In the interest of time, we'll run one of the fastq files through FastQC
fastqc data/fastq/gastric_cancer/SRR585570/SRR585570_1.fastq.gz \
	-o QC/gastric_cancer/fastqc_output
```

#### `-o`

The `-o` flag allows us to specify where the output of FastQC is saved. 

> Note that this is saved in a different place than the raw data files and in a directory specifically for quality control information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that this is saved in a separate place from the raw data file; in a directory specifically for quality control information.
```

> For comparison, we've prepared a FastQC report for one of the sets of reads for another sample in the experiment.

Reviewer: For comparison to what?

Author: `SRR585570_1` I can make this more explicit

It can be found at `QC/gastric_cancer/fastqc_output/SRR585574_1_fastqc.html`.

> **Let's look at the results together.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Let's look at the results.**
```

### Preprocessing with fastp

We use [fastp](https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp) to preprocess the FASTQ files ([Chen et al. _Bioinformatics._ 2018.](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty560)). 
Note that fastp has quality control functionality and many different options for preprocessing (see [all options on Github](https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp/blob/master/README.md#all-options)), most of which we will cover.
Here, we focus on adapter trimming, quality filtering, and length filtering.

Below, we discuss the two commands we used in the script.

**Create a directory**

```bash

> # Create a directory to hold the JSON and HTML output from Fastp

Reviewer: People (as you have mentioned before) might breeze over these comments at the beginning of these code chunks that are actually explaining the whole purpose of the code chunk. You may want to consider in this context, moving these two code chunk's comments out of the code chunk and instead prefacing the code chunks. This way people know what they are looking for and are less likely (but probably still likely) to glaze over the entire chunk.

Author: It says **Create a directory** at line 97

mkdir QC/gastric_cancer/fastp_output/
```

`mkdir` allows us to create a new folder in the `QC/gastric_cancer/` directory specifically to hold the _report_ information from fastp.
As we'll cover below, fastp essentially has two kinds of output: filtered FASTQ files (data) and reports (quality control).

**fastp**

> 

Reviewer: Can you add a sentence here to give them a heads up about what fastp is? Or perhaps move some of the sentences after this code chunk to before it? I think it would be easier to digest the code chunk if they know first why we are doing this.

Author: The introduction to fastp is at lines 91-93. This is intentional.

Author: I'm playing with the header levels to make things a bit more clear.

```bash
# Run the adapter and quality trimming step -- also produces QC report
fastp -i data/fastq/gastric_cancer/SRR585570/SRR585570_1.fastq.gz \
	-I data/fastq/gastric_cancer/SRR585570/SRR585570_2.fastq.gz \
	-o data/fastq/gastric_cancer/SRR585570/SRR585570_fastp_1.fastq.gz \
	-O data/fastq/gastric_cancer/SRR585570/SRR585570_fastp_2.fastq.gz \
	--qualified_quality_phred 15 \
	--length_required 20 \
	--report_title "SRR585570" \
	--json QC/gastric_cancer/fastp_output/SRR585570_fastp.json \
	--html QC/gastric_cancer/fastp_output/SRR585570_fastp.html
```

Below, we'll walk through the arguments/options we used to run `fastp`.
By default, fastp performs adapter trimming, which you can read more about [here](https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp#adapters). 
For paired-end data like SRR585570, adapters can be detected automatically without specifying an adapter sequence.

#### Input: `-i` and `-I`

> These arguments specify the read1 input and read2 input, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These arguments specify the read1 input and read2 input, respectively (remember that paired-end sequencing contains reads that are forward and backward). 
```
This is probably not the exact right wording, but people may have forgotten at this point that this is paired-end and that's what read1 and read2 pertain to.

Anything below 20, where a phred score of 20 represents a 1 in 100 chance that the call is incorrect, is considered poor quality by FastQC.
Using `--qualified_quality_phred 15` (which is the default), means scores >= 15 are considered "qualified." 
Using the default parameters as we do here, reads will be filtered out if >40% of the bases are unqualified.
You can read more about the quality filter functionality of fastp [here](https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp/blob/master/README.md#quality-filter).

The Salmon documentation notes that, given the way we run `salmon quant`, quantification may be more sensitive to calls that are likely to be erroneous (of low quality) and, therefore, quality trimming may be important.
Trimming, in contrast to filtering, refers to removing low quality base calls from the (typically 3') end of reads.
A recent preprint from the Salmon authors ([Srivastava et al. _bioRxiv._ 2019.](https://doi.org/10.1101/657874)) notes that trimming did not effect mapping rates from random publicly available human bulk (paired-end) RNA-seq samples (they used [TrimGalore](https://github.com/FelixKrueger/TrimGalore)). 

> fastp does have [the functionality](https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp#per-read-cutting-by-quality-score) to perform trimming using a sliding window.

Reviewer: I don't think before this point they've been given much information as tot how `fastp` works i.e. they don't know what the alternative or a default to a sliding window method would be, so this comment may just bring up more questions than anything else. It may not the the right crowd for this comment. Unless you'd like to add a quick preview of how `fastp` works.

Reviewer: Also, some of this stuff that pertains to `fastp` feels like it should be in the `fastp` section.

Author: This is the fastp section.

Author: We're not using the trimming functionality. I've added text to make this more explicit. I'm planning on noting that other software they may have heard of for this (Trimmomatic) use sliding scale windows. TrimGalore (used by the Srivastava et al.) is a bit different IIRC.

> _Note that there are two kinds of encoding for phred scores, phred33 and phred64. 

Reviewer: If you are going to make this note, can you briefly say what the difference between 33 and 64 is?

Reviewer: Or just put a link to something that does explain it.

Author: I can put a link.

FastQC guessed that the file for SRR585570 uses Sanger/Illumina 1.9 encoding (phred33). 
If we had phred64 data, we'd use the `--phred64` flag._

#### `--length_required`

Trimming reads may result in short reads, which may effect gene expression estimates ([Williams et al. _BMC Bioinformatics._ 2016.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-016-0956-2)).
Using `--length_required 20` means that reads shorter than 20bp will be discarded (similar to what was used in Srivastava et al. above).

#### `--report_title`

When we look at the HTML report, it's helpful to quickly identify what sample the report is for. Using `--report title "SRR585570"` means that the report will be titled "SRR585570" rather than the default ("fastp report").

#### `--json` and `--html`

With these options, we're specifying where the [JSON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON) and HTML reports will be saved (in the `QC/gastric_cancer/fastp_output/` we created) and what the filenames will be. 
Including the sample name in the filenames again may help us with project organization.

> **If we look at** `QC/gastric_cancer/fastp_output/SRR585570_fastp.json` **or the top of the HTML report, we can see that fastp reports certain metrics before and after filtering, which can be very useful in making analysis decisions.**

Reviewer: Is this something we are going to show them in the session? Are we going to open up a JSON file and explain more about this point?

> ### Quantification with Salmon

Reviewer: Because of all the different kinds of headers in the markdown, it might be nice to number the steps here so it's a bit easier for the participant tot navigate and follow along.

We'll use [Salmon](https://combine-lab.github.io/salmon/) for quantifying transcript expression ([documentation](http://salmon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)).
Salmon ([Patro, et al. _Nature Methods._ 2017.](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4197)) is fast and requires very little memory, which makes it a great choice for running on your laptop during training.
We can use the output for downstream analyses like differential expression analysis and clustering.
We use Salmon in mapping mode, with mapping validation enabled, using the following command:

```bash
# We perform quantification on the files that have been trimmed
# and use the index generated with -k 23, as this may "improve sensitivity"
# per the Salmon documentation
salmon quant -i index/Homo_sapiens/short_index \
	-l A \
	-1 data/fastq/gastric_cancer/SRR585570/SRR585570_fastp_1.fastq.gz \
	-2 data/fastq/gastric_cancer/SRR585570/SRR585570_fastp_2.fastq.gz \
	-o data/quant/gastric_cancer/SRR585570 \
	--validateMappings --rangeFactorization 4 \
	--gcBias --seqBias
```

Below, we'll walk through the arguments/options we used to run `salmon quant`.

> #### Transcriptome index: `-i`

Reviewer: We could make a point to show them how arguments that are called the same thing `-i` can mean very different things in different programs or different functions and this emphasizes why it's important to reference the documentation.

Reviewer: ^ this may be a verbal point as opposed to written.

Author: Yes, I'm not going to make a written point about this.

Salmon requires a set of transcripts (what we want to quantify) in the form of a transcriptome index built with `salmon index`.

> Building an index can take a while (but you only have to do it once!), so we've built the one we use today ahead of time.

Reviewer: Unless you switch to version 14 >:(

Before we use it, we'll take a moment to give a bit of background.

You can see how we obtained this index and others [on GitHub](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-txome-prep).
Note that we used Homo sapiens GRCh38, Ensembl release 95.

> It is important to keep track of what build, resource, and files were used and putting our shell scripts on GitHub allows us to do that.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For reproducibility purposes, it's important to keep track of what build, resource, and files were used and putting our shell scripts on GitHub allows us to do that.  
```

Author: I think it is important for broader, i.e., "getting things to work together," purposes.

> It is important to stress that although the analysis results appear to give a pass/fail result, these evaluations must be taken in the context of what you expect from your library.

The [documentation for individual modules/analyses](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/Help/3%20Analysis%20Modules/) in FastQC is a great resource!

To save time, our script only runs one FASTQ file for SRR585570 with the following command:

```bash
# In the interest of time, we'll run one of the fastq files through FastQC
fastqc data/fastq/gastric_cancer/SRR585570/SRR585570_1.fastq.gz \
	-o QC/gastric_cancer/fastqc_output
```

#### `-o`

The `-o` flag allows us to specify where the output of FastQC is saved. 
Note that this is saved in a separate place than the raw data files and in a directory specifically for quality control information.

For comparison to the report for `SRR585570_1.fastq.gz` we generate with our script, we've prepared a FastQC report for one of the sets of reads for another sample in the experiment.
It can be found at `QC/gastric_cancer/fastqc_output/SRR585574_1_fastqc.html`.

**Let's look at the reports for both samples.**

> ## 2. Preprocessing with fastp

Reviewer: Does pre-processing need a hyphen or nah?

Author: Chen et al. use `preprocessing`
